Olivier, granted me an interview after Solène. To sum up his career: water and sanitation and civil engineering, Congo (displaced population), Ethiopia, Uganda. Work with Solidarité International. He is now CEO of Baobab Tech.

I asked him a few questions that were key to understanding the industry and he filled up some essential information gaps very precisely:
How did you get in the humanitarian world? 
  I started off in Belgium when I was 16, working on micro-barrages in West Africa. I did some unpaid internships after traveling alone into Uganda. Humanitarian work in water supply in Ethiopia. Internships (in Tunisia), understanding the dev sector, paid internship managing staff in Ethiopia, Congo with Solidarité, Sudan Irish NGO.
  Organizations hire national staff now, it is very different to get into this type of position in WASH. I studied a year in Canada, and I  was looking for organisations that are building support and capabilites abroad instead of working there. It made more sense to be a trainer, I was part of the executive team, managing half of the organization. I am now working in Calgary, and slowed down on travel with kids, 10 and 13, but I worked in Cameroun and Zambia (with kids?), as well.

About Baobab tech?
Our sector is in the broad social environment impact space, for profit, that started with the emergence of Generative AI and language models. I started off before GPT3 came out. In the water sector you can use knowledge retrieval systems, GenAI, there is a lot of unstructured data, big pools of data and it is hard to find people who work well on these subjects. We are not building ML models, we work on more generative AI and ML / NLP spaces. We work mostly contract-based and with people who are able to combine unstructured knowledge retrieval, climate-related data, etc. We need some help in data science, we hire developers, web-app developers, mostly project-based. The company, even for profit, has a slow organic growth. We are trying to stay very lean.

As you worked there, could you tell me more about what is happening in this domain in Africa?
We might be partnering with some organizations. There exists digital solutions, for instance in Nigeria which is quite vibrant with technical solutions and AI powered retrieval for water and sanitation. There are geospecific capabilities, built in countries or improved in countries, even regionally, in East Africa as well.

What is your view on using Google partnerships?
Social impact interest in big corporations in general is kind of the same. Philanthropic NGOs are 80/90% locked in Microsoft. They propose combination of services: grant on ideas, pair up with big NGOs. They work with Save the Children, for instance, pairing engineers with them. Google works on large-scale projects that can become quite local, for instance, they have expanded flood alerts tools to 100 countries. They provide lots of credits, tutorials, how to get hooked in. But they are not designed for this. Generally, I don't really like to work with big corporations. I'd rather partner with governments, with data providers, who have ethical backgrounds, clauses of doing no harm.

What about data centers?
On any of the three top cloud provider you can run your own models. It doesn't matter where the data center is (it might be cheaper if local but not always). What is different is data governance rules and adapting to them according to data regions. But, yes somehow a bit behind but as is France, for instance.

What is happening with GenAI and the humanitarian sector and Baobab Tech? How cautious are organisation with pilot phase and R&D?
At this stage the service is being sold (WASH AI, as a semi-feature product) but as of general governments are more negotiating open-source, not turn-key solutions. It is an experimental space for them. There are groups of institutional and individual level adoption, the larger the stricter. Some use Microsoft chat, Copilot for internal use. They don't have production-ready tools, they are experimenting, they are experimenting on internal policies on how to use AI, on how to use it in the right way. They need a lot of training and building capabilities. They engage in experimenting quietly. But the situation is also complicated with the defunding from UK and United States. Yet, they are cost experimenting or spending more for performance: AI Agents can replace Data Scientists. What took 2 hours before, for processing data takes minutes now. Organisations nowadays are advancing in this sense, and they are even taking more risks than they should. Yet, they can't get the traction, for ego, fear. But there is huge untapped opportunity in every single space (productivity, sector wide, shared data, secured shared data, individual actions, day to day).

Where do you find grants and revenue?
They continuously exist through revenue stream from specific tools, direct investment entrepreneurs in the countries that will be using these tools. I started off my own funds, I did some content management systems and created client relationships. With the profit that I could leverage, I started hiring. There are large direct grants for wash specifically, and you know how it works one call leads to another, sometimes. When time and funds, we could work on non-WASH topics with AI. I hire Data Scientists and developers on contract and they have been helping me out on two different projects. The rest, I do a lot of work myself. GenAi is currently exploding in both ways: more and more organizations are able to do that, supply and demand is increasing, but I don't want to be growing a big company, with big heavy projects, we are very value-based even in full-profit, we rely on expertise and responsibility.

What about data in the large organizations? For instance UN, with Global Pulse?
UN is not designed to do innovations, or leverage innovation. They are stuck with the UN bureaucracy and count every penny. I wouldn't hold my breath on what they are going to do, or any of their innovation labs, I would rely on the private sector and entrepreneurs to grow those.

What could we bring you?
Hard to find talent on the edge of LLM, in the applied space, AI developer.

Are there other firms like yours?
There are individual consultancies building products, advising certain number of projects. They are actually building and playing with technology, internally with organization, but there are no magical products pick and buy, it is a huge experimental phase, organizations are kind of exploring and partnering.

What is your stack?
React, LangGraph, LangChain, Python based-frameworks. Self-posted models (models 10 to 16, only tokens), paying models, hit scale it is worth it (secure data, cloud deployments, by token). Versailles AI SDK mistral, you don't need to change it is model agnostic.

After this long conversation, I had another point of view on the matter. This is a very exciting moment for the industry and I would love to be part of it. In any case, the realm of possibilities and improvements is huge and the need to keep technology close to the human is even greater in this area. I might have sometimes dropped the sense of where the data comes from, what they represent, what consequences could GenAI have on the workers, on the minds, on the work conditions, on the future overall, to come back to do you know what you are doing? Is positivism a good option? Obsolete questions, organisations have a very good sense and want to benefit from any pierce through in technology they could to better peoples' lives, right? Measuring the risk of course.
