I started getting interested in tech when I was at Polytechnique, getting out of hard sciences. Innovation specifically in environmental studies did catch a lot of my attention.
Playing around with all that had to do with Physics and its applications in the real world. I started a science and arts project that made fly little objects in a woofer.
The purpose being to study fluid dynamics around the structures.
Fluid dynamics is very pretty. The dynamic of helicopter blades, the flight of dandelion, the waves in a river or in the sea.
I then got interested in architecture and urban planning because of my boyfriend at the time but it turned out that engineering in remediation was
as well a very good endeavor. Innovating in floating bridge structures, for instance.
I got into data by doing an internship in a QR code firm, that was a very good start. Then I did an internship at CIESIN for decadal geospatial evolution of SO2 emissions and its impact on climate change.
I got into data with a project of wells feasibility in Somalia for mitigating migrations in water management and development of water systems. 
This sent me to predict and modelise precipitations and water availability as well as some ground data. That would have been a very interesting project 
being in the real world. And that set me onto a path for data for good. Help to development, environmental betterments, etc. I vaguely brushed a project
that benchmarked bayesian inference for the mining industry the idea being to show them they had a financial advantage in reducing pollution. 
And new biolooking or fishlooking propulsion systems. But did not want to put screws in the wall. That was stupid.
In 2015 I took my first job at a firm aimed at reducing electricity consumption in the residential sector with connected devices on air conditionning. 
It was hard, getting into data without a training and getting into your first job like this. Yet I succeeded into learning some coding
and language, and getting acquainted with electronics as well as large scale projects and data. It did not passionate me and I went to do the second part of the
MVA. I looked for something with neurosciences and theater afterwards. I think I had nothing to do there for the pure computer vision part but I was very happy to do
maths again and neurosciences would interest most. 
I have always felt a push for freedom that was very deeply rooted in a sensation of suffocating in the motherly environment and in engineering without
having lived enough. I also love nature. I thus decided that engineering was to be put on the side. And I went on a year and half trip to South America, 
where I felt I would know better the life conditions and find a life purpose, that I had already found before. I interviewed a few people,
actors of social and environemental changes. I met a lot of lights on my way. Baristas, laywers, military people, tech people, isrealis, autralians,
canadians, drillers, doctors, students, colombians, brazilians, oceanographers, biologists, mostly young turned towards the future and hope and I did not get much into the details but I channeled their
energies, life purposes, trajectories. And a lot of nature, and a lot of slums and a lot of road villages and a lot of transportation, buses, trains, cars with strangers, very dangerous
now that I think about it, very nice people. An ability to be blending in even looking like an eye-catching peacock dressed in pink.
I think, now that I see life through another prism, people are mean and making fun of airiness, yet I feel like I was disarming any comment
with my being so nice, so light and so unaware of danger and life difficulties and just passing through like a unicorn. Maybe people started
talking but at some point they would just stop because it was not funny to make fun of ungraspable. Or I just didn't hear, but I dont think so.
Beautiful places I saw: museums in Bogota, cemeteries in Sucre, little villages and rides in Salento with nice wild dogs running around.
A whiff or woof of danger when a stray dog would come out at night. And breathing all the time. Plants and viewpoints. Packing and unpacking.
Getting utmostly useful stuff and leaving behing what is not needed with a heavy heart. The weight of my two backpacks, with leg muscles and
a real courage. Reading, trying to find a way as an independant woman. Getting to know what is tourist and what is not, that advertised dreamly places
are not necessarily the best. Surprises on the way, learning how to enjoy life without working. But always searching for the next step.
Learning how to enjoy the path and not just the destination. A world of sensations: staying hours in the bus, watching the landscape passing by, 
dropping any concern of life, of material problems, of finding a job, a way, just being there and meeting people and nature and places.
Learned diving. Mesmerizing.
Long way to theater. Greece first, would have stayed.
Opened and closed theater. Really scary.
Life scares.
Professor and decision to have a baby by assisted procreation. 
Professor not good choice.
Baby, good choice. Another freedom.
Crazy students, crazy PhD, crazy firms and many body pains.
Looking for an appartement in Paris is hard.
Getting back on track is very easy. Just follow passion and work hard, except there is a baby who is a little girl now.
Exciting projects. A generative AI revolution ? All automated, scary things? War.
Long-termism.
Arts, jj, EMDR and exciting projects.
