Red Cross is 70000 volunteers and 20000 employees. The French Red Cross works for, among others, street outreach, a small call center of 100 people to answer those in need, natural disasters on the territory such as Mayotte recently. There is a different entity whose headquarters is in Geneva, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for Conflict Zones, founded in 1963, for Switzerland being historically a neutral zone.
  Pierre Ly is today the Coordinator of Data and AI Innovations at French Red Cross. He started his career at the École Polytechnique and continued with a master's at Supaero. He worked first at Thales and then at 	Dassault Systèmes in Engineering and identifies himself more as of the operational side and deployment of technology than being a technical person. He started at the Red Cross as a volunteer and got hired for a small project of logistics of deliveries. During COVID he held a position of fighting social isolation, for citizen mobilization and vaccination for 10 million people (as Red Cross is also present in hospitals with nurses and in medico-social), among other projects. He told me about his position and the state of the organization in data.

"When we started, on COVID, we worked on all tech-related topics without project management, in a reactive mode, being highly operational and responding to needs for the next day. We were 15 volunteers, we solved issues very quickly, having to plan things on the roadmap. It is now interesting for me to be making the connections with crisis topics and crisis management.
  When COVID stopped, I started working for the Ukraine crisis. We needed to solve the issue of entire TGVs getting in with refugees.
  We then needed people for another project: new treatments. We recruited and started working in V-model: scope of work, operational idea, technique, conception, then testing and deployment. Afterwards, you have increasingly complex needs to implement in the back and forth with users and testers. I can, as well, work with the IT department to drive the specialists we contract to explain to them what we want. And I also worked on the Olympics."

"There is still no real organization for a data and AI unit and we are only two or three to speak this language fluently. Yet, it is going to grow in the next months to year.
  In order to reduce the administrative burden, we use chatbots. We also have thought about a tool for crisis scenario simulation for first-aid workers. As background, we have the idea of piloting with data, with the volunteers. Another subject is the piloting through figures, which is not the case right now and should arrive soon.
   Building a data project is not as easy as it is in a big organization and we have a certain inertia and a certain lack of resources. We need funds, as do the other activities at Red Cross. We regularly check the postings on tech for good or AI for good, we can propose projects to sponsors, philanthropists and tech companies. We can also, more concretely, partner with schools in hackathons, such as 42. I have recently participated in the datacraft* awards and we'll be there on June 23rd for the ceremony."

  "R&D capacity is high and we can go fast on AI, there is a huge demand and the crisis-oriented subjects are many at the international level. There are several categories: training, emergency operations, distribution, shelter, cash, transfer, water sanitation, logistics, and so on.
  For our operations, we come and help the local Red Cross or Red Crescent. We support operation personnel that are already there. This year I had a training in management for 10 days to be validated to be a coordinator on information management and I would like to go on the field to understand better the needs, for at least a month and a half, that is the level above volunteer that stay three weeks. Otherwise the turnover is too high. I am 33 and I live in Lyon with my girlfriend.
  Programs of development, in emergency crisis, are normed by humanitarian standards, UN agencies and big NGOs are united for sphere standards (see links below). There are iso-norms for humanitarian, for instance on distribution: humane, impartial, neutral, water for the week instead of just a bottle, and so on. It is very normed contrary to national associations and adapts to needs. Humanitarian is standardized and protocoled as an opex. So we have a radically different mission than humanitarian."

"One of the current questions in our department is for the collected data: what type of response do we need to bring on the table? In Mayotte, in slums, for instance, do you need tarpaulin or money for people to prioritize? If money, how do you send it: vouchers? Mobile payment? And this on several aspects: distribution, operational, wash, medical, logistics, with a fast-travelling information, which depends on the field. The worst could be that you could be more harmful than helpful.
  That is, actually, a subject I am passionate about. Yet you have to go there and I want kids, get married, settle. I might have to review my ambitions because they ask you to be half the time at the Headquarters, half on the field. There are missions of capacity reinforcement where you are a super expert consultant to help Red Cross, there. It is more oriented crisis than tech."

"There exists subsidiaries: 510 for the Netherlands and the Spanish Red Cross. They have mega partners: Vodafone, Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the Netherlands, and so on. There are other NGOs as well such as Hulo for the logistics part. They might be more free to advance faster on the technologies. WFP has a lot of money and an accelerator and they might go faster as well.
  We worked and could work on digital tools for rescuers and for awareness-raising to crisis: you would input your name, age, type of housing and it would output a scenario or micro-evaluation of risks of flooding in your town with a prompt for questions, an interaction, and could also have input/ouput videos. There could be plenty of other applications: simulation generators in crisis for military staff, energy crisis, and so on. 
  In terms of change management, 20% of the organization knows what prompting is. For satellite imagery, what to do in crisis response, confronted with the context of the different international directors, overseas, there is not much that came out. When it comes to drones in France, they are used by civil security, for operations. Why would we develop a capacity that we would use only once every 4 years which needs resources and intensive trainings that are hard to create."

"I had a training last week on information management on the field, with a cholera scenario, with field hospitals, that was a bit like military-style training. The meds had only paper, each with their own. In order to report patient case to the WHO, the question was how to create a reliable system. Could we use one tablet for all. No. Everyone has his own pace and writes down the main important things in their day. The reporting can be made at night and with technology like OCR and formalized forms to feed a dashboard of patients we could save 3 hours work at night to the meds. In the change initiative, if we want to address operational, we need to alleviate tech."

"In the national medico-social, Doctolib and video consultations have become the norm as well as online prescriptions. This could go very fast for the organization in generative AI within the next two years. It will take more time for Red Cross, for mass deployment. There are initiatives, and there will be more coming, we will tinker a lot, and thousands of questions are going to arise. We will need to take this to the headquarters, use case preparation without any GDPR stake for now because we are just experimenting on few devices. We are not yet at the data maturity level of the American Red Cross who is very advanced on Big Data and Generative AI, for fluxes of blood donation and logistics of blood transport."

How are you going to hire? Have the team grow?

"We need to structure data internally, first. Then we will use generative AI with our volunteers. How do we get to tech for the mass of volunteers? We had trainings of 50 people each time, one per department for food aid orders: concatenate data, Google Sheets, connecting and we added each line in real time. Some people were really old or very far from technology and it was a really good time.
Palantir is another organization that could help us deploy tools, but they have NSA restrictions and we have to figure out if our legal enables us to work with them"

What about the network (phone, internet, social media)? Do you rely on these data?

"In Haute-Savoie, we have a telecom truck with radio and wifi, portable radios and digital ciphering, (laughs). When it comes to the field, the headquarters is not at the initiative of starlink (Musk's internet network from anywhere), for instance. If needed on the field and have the budget, I would use these data. Internationally, the field is equipped and gets what it can when it can. In France, the phone data and internet data falls under the competence of the State, the Civil Security, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There is an issue of GDPR, of course. Usually, we are the last, as an association, to benefit from technology: private sector first, then public, then associative.
  It is like in the army, you have to start from the principle that you will not get anything and sometimes you get something. There might not be good internet connection, but it is less the case now. Yet, Starlink is not approved by the headquarters. We have secured computers for safety of operations and GDPR, sometimes tablets for inquiries in damaged areas, with tools for forms. And we get a phone with a sim if we can. All of this depending on the state you are in.
  For now, we don't have the capacity to use satellite imagery but it would be good to get trained on the matter."

"We have been facing a lot of benchmarks: communication in crisis, service providers, often we face an incomprehension because of our neutral positioning and we avoid reputational crisis. The Ukraine Red Cross in Russia, Gaza and the Israeli Red Cross." (ça je ne sais pas ce que tu voulais dire)

A viewpoint oriented more on the structure of a volunteer organization

  "What we can do in the near future is hire on the data division for 300000 euros of salaries: one senior and two or three juniors which is not much in this industry, but, that is the Red Cross salary grid. We need a strategic and digital transformation manager that has to be present, not in remote. We lost ours to expatriation earlier this year.
  There is a lot to do: dashboards at the territorial level, piloting operations, facilitating feedback data from the field, massify data and get them to the headquarters. Today, what exists is an analysis to have an intended image of the activities but not other parcellar data nor too much reflected upon. We need, at minimum a dictionary of existing data that is, for now, known by a few people in the organization, in order to speak the same language."

  "Who could have a change on the general direction of the organization. It would have to do with the national president and executive bodies who could elect him. There are three new candidates to the board of directors, and I am one of them. If I am not elected, there might be people from my list who have been infused with the idea of using data through the organization and might really make a change in the next four years."

  "We have very good departmental presidents, volunteers, such as the one from Haute-Savoie. Cheese seller, who has 7 local units and manages 1000 volunteers. In the association model, the challenges of transformation and the tooling is a unit local model replicated across all the levels of the organization, with volunteers and professionals. We need to review the statuses."

"There is also a lot to do on support functions, especially in the medico-social: board of directors in establishments, ephad, esat, nurses. It would be functions in legal, accounting, DSI, real-estate, some technical subjects and operations, management control, managing budgets, providing resources through operational staff, calls for projects for which we are understaffed. Data enables us to earn time."

"Crisis management and response is a field that is very close to engineering and I like the sharpened way of thinking that is very compatible with my training at Polytechnique. It had to do with taking the best decision in a narrow timeframe, activate responses to crise with agility: taking decisions on hypothesis, formal and informal data. I have never learnt as much as during these Covid months: dailies of 15 very skilled volunteers who had never worked with Red Cross before but on the same subjects, the same cause. It was very humane."

"We have a culture of opening and communication. My decisions impact the organization and when I started I turned out to need a lot of information. I got all latitude from my manager to do so asking my friends at Polytechnique, asking reinforcement in the organization and mobilizing people and resources. We ended up together structuring everything in a very simple way: problem, formalization, reflexion, analysis and solution in 48 hours on a situation that nobody could tackle at the time."

"For crisis response what I like most, from when I was a volunteer at the headquarter, is the adrenaline, the sense of purpose, the fact that you answer a problem in 24 hours, and the power of a volunteer organization."

What is the main factor of change that is not data-related in the organization?
"The existing modification and projects that are not data-oriented necessary at Red Cross are preparation to potential crisis. Otherwise it is management of delivery of food aid, social emergency, call center, amongst others."

You have an appointment at 2PM, could you conclude on this interview?

"I really want to produce something impactful as Guillaume Rozier (Macron's data counsellor) or Paul Duhan (Bayes Impact). In the near future, we will be integrating volunteer on AI in an organic way. Another problematic is the exclusion of the digital world: 16 million people are far from it, 9 million completely excluded, mainly older people or people who might be scared of technology.
  Another comment would be on one of the main reasons why this conversion is so slow. There are so many regulations: CNIL, Europe, that is specialist of regulating before innovating. New firms in the private sector are more prone to navigate this but we will do our best."

Advice research:
- IHEDN
- IHENI
- https://www.cartong.org/ for cartography
- https://www.spherestandards.org/
- https://hulo.coop/fr/ logitics for humanitarian
- https://www.highwind-ems.com/fr/a-propos/ using smartphone data for emergencies
- https://www.croix-rouge.fr/nos-actions-a-l-international/les-equipes-de-reponses-aux-urgences-humanitaires Red Cross Projects
